# BERTu Ġurnalistiku Intermediate pre-training of BERTu on news articles and fine-tuning for Question Answering using SQuAD

Final Year Project submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of B.Sc. I.T. (Hons.) in Software Development.

## Abstract 
This project aims to address the scarcity of resources for Maltese, being a low-resource language, in Artificial Intelligence, focusing on extractive Question Answering and domain-oriented models. Despite the widespread availability of language models and related resources, such as datasets, in languages such as English, the absence of similar resources for Maltese presents a significant gap that this research project seeks to address.

Firstly, the project compiled a corpus of Maltese news articles to serve as the basis for further training Maltese language models on text pertaining to a particular domain of knowledge. Secondly, it translated the Stanford Question Answering datasets to Maltese to train Maltese language models for extractive Question Answering and addressed the lack of a state-of-the-art dataset to achieve this. Furthermore, the study also made use of a manual approach to enrich the resulting translated dataset. Subsequently, the project fine-tuned Maltese Large Language Models to perform extractive Question Answering. Moreover, the study further pre-trained a Maltese language model on the corpus of news articles and then on the Stanford Question Answering datasets to analyse if further pre-training the model on text pertaining to a particular domain benefits the models' performance in extractive Question Answering. Through a suite of experiments and optimisations, the performance of the developed models in Maltese was evaluated against state-of-the-art models in English.  These experiments delve into the impacts of the pre-training corpus that teaches the language model the fundamentals of the language, further pre-training on a corpus pertaining to a domain of knowledge such as news articles and the size of the fine-tuning dataset to train a model for a task have on the performance of a Maltese language model on extractive Question Answering. 

Furthermore, the project developed a chat User Interface capable of leveraging the Maltese Large Language Models trained for extractive Question Answering for efficient, transparent, and accessible inference even for non-technical users.  

Overall, this project contributed to the advancement of Artificial Intelligence in Maltese, particularly in Question Answering and domain-based models, expanding the accessibility and applicability of Artificial Intelligence.